## Collected notes

### Lessons learned

- Trying to prove things about a definition can be extremely tedious. Sometimes it might be worth defining an inductive and proving it equivalent to some definition just to have the proofs be so much easier.

- Having `None` in `literal` is cool, but maybe unecessary. It gives life to the optimization of rejecting a regex completely, but that could be a separate analysis on the regex. At the moment None can arise only with the CdEmpty character class.

- Leaving things not proven is a better way to progress. Proving small simple but very time consuming lemmas is wasting time and not progressing the theory. However, on the other hand I did leave a lemma unproven once, and realized only later that it was actually not a true lemma despite me relying on that lemma in other proofs.

## To discuss

- See last week's notes on general quantifiers. It would seem adding them directing and doing the expansion in the bytecode is easier than doing an AST rewrite. But doing an AST rewrite can give good foundation for future proofs.
- Is there any way to do a shallow simplification and choose the exact subterms? I want it to compute the fuel and the bytecode for me.
- Add a CI to Linden to check if proofs compile
- Thesis format? Typst?
- How difficult is it to update Warblre to newer ECMAScript?
- The pipeline of the PikeVM proof
- Does linden do "Linear Matching of the Capture Reset Property"?
- If we add `?` and `??` and then prove equivalence between general quantifiers and expansion on the AST + usage of `*`/`*?`/`?`/`??`, we could argue the same could have been done with anchors and look-arounds (which was proven to be equivalent). Maybe it is good to discuss where is the border between supporting directly vs through an equivalence. Is that why anchors were not implemented?
- There is a `LazyPrefix.v`. Some proofs there might be very useful.

## Action items
