## Collected notes

### Porting Warblre to Rocq 9

Firstly, I must say, it is very nice that "Coq" is not a substring of "Rocq". Doing a grep of "coq" returns only things that need to be migrated.

It is quite unfortunate how big of an undertaking renaming Coq to Rocq is. Anyway, to port Linden to Rocq (which should be a very small effort), we first must port Warblre. I have sent a PR: <https://github.com/epfl-systemf/Warblre/pull/6>. There are a few blockers, `alectryon` using SerAPI (which does not work with Rocq 9) being the main one. Rocq 9 seems to have fixed quite a few bugs that were hit by Warblre which allowed to clear some _LATER_'s.

### $\square$ of the prefix accelerated PikeVM!

#### PikeTree acceleration

Before we were missing a step in the PikeTree which would be analogous to PikeVM's `_acc` step (one that jumps to the next input position where the prefix matches). This was now added and is the following:

```rocq
| pts_acc:
  (* if there are no more active or blocked trees and we have some nextt, *)
  (* we accelerate by non-deterministically skipping branches with no results *)
    forall inp best seen nextinp nextt acc t
      (ACC: pike_tree_acc inp nextt nextinp acc t),
      pike_tree_step (PTS inp [] best [] (Some nextt) seen) (PTS nextinp [pike_tree_initial_tree t] best [] (Some acc) initial_seentrees)
```

`pike_tree_acc` is a non-deterministic skipping of head branches that do not contain a match. The definition is the following:

```rocq
Inductive pike_tree_acc : input -> tree -> input -> tree -> tree -> Prop :=
| acc_keep:
    forall inp c next pref nextt t1 t2
    (INPUT: inp = Input (c::next) pref)
    (NEXTT: nextt = Read c
      (Progress
        (Choice
          t1
          (GroupAction (Reset []) t2)))
    ),
    pike_tree_acc inp nextt (Input next (c::pref)) t2 t1
| acc_skip:
    forall inp c next pref nextt t1 t2 nextinp acc t
    (INPUT: inp = Input (c::next) pref)
    (NEXTT: nextt = Read c
      (Progress
        (Choice
          t1
          (GroupAction (Reset []) t2)))
    )
    (LEAF: first_leaf t1 (Input next (c::pref)) = None)
    (TRANS: pike_tree_acc (Input next (c::pref)) t2 nextinp acc t),
    pike_tree_acc inp nextt nextinp acc t.
```

The transitive rule exists only if we skipped a branch, we do not want to skip some branches in the middle of the tree. So the final `nextinp` is the input point to which we accelerated, `acc` is the next `nextt`, and `t` is the backtracking tree of `r` at `nextinp`.

The proof of preservation of the PikeTree invariant for the `_acc` step requires induction over `pike_tree_acc`. We relate `pts_acc` to the PikeVM by skipping exactly `nextprefix` amount of head branches. Since `nextprefix` indicates that there is no prefix at the next `nextprefix` input positions, we know the `first_leaf` will be `None`.

Additionally, the `pts_final` rule had to be updated:

```rocq
| pts_final:
  (* moving to a final state when there are no more active or blocked trees *)
    forall inp best nextt seen
      (LEAF: option_flat_map (fun t => first_leaf t inp) nextt = None),
      pike_tree_step (PTS inp [] best [] nextt seen) (PTS_final best)
```

This option should be used only whenever `nextt` contains no results. We cannot just say that we use this rule whenever `nextt = None` as in the PikeVM. The reason is that `nextprefix = None -> nextt = None` does not hold, more details in the discussion of the PikeEquiv invariant.

#### PikeEquiv invariant

We want to prove that for every execution of the PikeVM, there exists one of the PikeTree which preserves some invariant. Until now it talked about how we can related active threads to active trees, blocked threads to blocked trees, etc. Now we must relate `nextt` to `nextprefix`. The intuitive idea is that we want to say two things:

- `nextprefix` describes how many top branches of `nextt` do not contain a result
- `nextt` has a shape of `Read -> Choice (tree_of r) (next_nextt)`

The invariant is split into five cases:

1. When `nextprefix = None`, `nextt = None`
2. When `nextprefix = None`, `nextt = Some Mismatch` (we exhausted `nextt`)
3. When `nextprefix = None`, `nextt = Some (Read -> Choice t1 t2)` where `t1` contains no results

   Case 2 and 3 is needed because the PikeTree never turns a `Some` `nextt` into a `None`. It will skip head branches one by one. On the other hand, if the PikeVM does not find the next position of a prefix, `nextprefix` will turn into `None`.

4. When `nextprefix = Some 0`, `nextt = Some (Read -> Choice t1 t2)` where `t1` and `t2` have the correct shape
5. When `nextprefix = Some (S n)`, `nextt = Some (Read -> Choice t1 t2)` where `t2` has the correct shape and `t1` contains no results

This invariant is proven to hold at the initial state and is preserved on steps. This concludes the proof of correctness of the prefix accelerated PikeVM!

### Look-arounds?

A part of my thesis was supposed to be around formalizing look-arounds in the PikeVM. There is a bit less than 2 months left of my thesis. I will dedicate a day to think about what kind of lemmas we need (<https://github.shilangyu.dev/pikevm-systemf/meeting-notes/2025_11_12.html#look-arounds-in-pikevm>) and see if there is some self contained section that can be tackled. It is unlikely I can complete the entire formalization in the time that is left.

Instead, I will most likely focus on improving the meta engine. This will keep the topic of the thesis more contained. Here are possible next extensions:

- Exploit `Exact` literals

  If the regex has no groups, we can just run a substring search. This requires rechecking how we handle look-arounds during extraction.

- Extract multiple prefixes

  This is especially useful for case-insensitive searches. Then something like `/ab/i` would extract 4 prefixes; "ab", "Ab", "aB", "AB" (all of them being a `Prefix`).

  This is also generally useful for regexes allowing us to handle disjunctions better: `/a|b/` generates `Prefix "a"` and `Prefix "b"`.

  There are specialized substring search algorithms that can use efficiently multiple needles.

  This would require a bit of refactoring. Currently we have a theorem which says "if the tree has a result at some input `inp`, then `inp` starts with the extracted prefix". We would either have to rephrase it as "[...] starts with one of the extracted prefixes". While we are at it, a bigger generalization can be done (see next point).

- Instead of talking about substring searches, we can more generally talk about any strategy that advances our input

  The only axiom it has to fulfill is to not skip input positions where there could potentially be a match. Then, substring searches (prefix acceleration) is one concrete instance of such a strategy. This is sound, but first it would be worth thinking about whether this abstraction is even needed (ie. is there any other useful instance that is not substring searching).

- Extending the wrapper to do prefix acceleration multiple times

  A backtracking engine does that, and Aurèle has recently completed a proof of a memoized backtracking engine

- Actually have a meta engine

  We could implement a generic "give me a regex and input and I will give you a match" function that will dispatch it to different engines depending on some heuristics. This should be eventually proven to be equivalent to `BuiltinExec`.

### PRs to Linden

Having finished the first big proof of a prefix accelerated PikeVM, we feel more secure about the changes I introduced and we can start merging my work into Linden. The work is split into three parts:

1. Substring searches, literal extraction and their relation to regex matching
2. Small meta engine (running prefix acceleration once at the start, handling the `Impossible` literal)
3. Prefix accelerated PikeVM and its correctness proof

First two have been now prepared and requested for merging:

1. <https://github.com/epfl-systemf/Linden/pull/15>
2. <https://github.com/epfl-systemf/Linden/pull/16>

Before the third part is merged we want to explore some possible refactorings of the proof. Mainly around the invariant in PikeEquiv.

## To discuss

- Upgrade Linden/Warblre to Rocq 9? -> yes, I will work on it on the side

## Action items

- Open first two PRs to Linden
- Start writing the report
- Refactor PikeVM proof to be mergable
- Think about look-arounds lemmas
