## Collected notes

### Leftmost longest vs leftmost greedy

Both prioritize finding a match as early in the haystack as possible. Then, the second thing to consider is how long the match is. Given a choice in the matching (from `e1|e2` or `e*` etc), the longest semantics picks choices such that the final match is the longest possible. For greedy, we pick choices such that will lead to the match the quickest.

### Nullable quantifiers

If `e` can match the empty string, iterations of `e{0,n}` cannot match the empty string.

### Capture reset

After each quantifier iteration, the values of all capture groups inside are reset to undefined. So `/(?:(a)|b)*/` on "ab" will match the entirety of "ab", but the group `(a)` will be undefined.

### Backereferences to a group that did not match anything

Then the backreference matches the empty string. This applied to both backreferences to a group which did not match anything preceding the reference, and to a group following the reference.

## To discuss

- Getting started with Linden requires installing Warblre, would be good to include in the README. Or, if possible make the dune project reference the github repo with a pinned version

  `opam pin add warblre https://github.com/LindenRegex/Warblre.git`

- Does the backtracking tree allow to reason about leftmost longest semantics as well?
  - Although, look-arounds in the semantics (namely `lk_result`) returns the groups of the first branch that matched.
- Why the nullable quantifiers are only for `min = 0`?
- Why does the Warblre matching function return the end index only? What about the start? -> see below the "full" algorithm of matching

## Action items

- Setup VSCode to work with Rocq, talk with Victor
- Pin the Warblre version in Linden and link it to the github URL
- Continue reading the paper
- Start working on anchors in PikeVM
- Do the exercise from branch `aurele/exercise`
- Currently, matching is always anchored at some position in the haystack, and the general matching algorithm is defined as:

  ```
  for i in 0..len(s):
      if anchored_match(r, s[i:]):
          return Matched
  ```

  We want to establish an equivalence between the above algorithm an a rewrite of the regex into `.*?(r)_#0`: the regex is wrapped in a group indexed zero and is prefixed by a lazy dot-star.

  Once this is proven, we can prove that the prefix acceleration is also equivalent to this algorithm.
